# Changelog

All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.

The format is based on [Keep a Changelog](https://keepachangelog.com/en/1.1.0/),
and this project adheres to [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html).

## [Unreleased]

### Added

- Add `--name-vars-by-file` option to rename data symbols based on their offset
  and in their containing file.
- Add `--name-vars-by-section` considers the `.text` and `.ovl`/`.reloc` sections.
  - For unknown `.text` symbols (that are not functions, or any kind of label)
    the `T_` prefix will be used.
  - For `.ovl`/`.reloc` symbols the `REL_` prefix will be used

### Changed

- File splits can now contain reloc sections (`.ovl` or `.reloc`).
- Type-based name generation (`--name-vars-by-type`) can now be mixed with
  other kinds of name generations, allowing to give extra information on the
  symbol name.
- Autogenerated symbol names will not use a suffix if said symbol is generated
  after another symbol or file.

## [1.19.0] - 2023-12-04

### Added

- Try to detect when instructions are setting the `$gp` register with the
  passed `GP_VALUE` and use the `_gp` symbol instead of symbolizing an
  unrelated symbol.
  - This check is only applied on non PIC mode.
- Track if a symbol is accessed with a `%gp_rel`.
- Add `--sequential-label-names` option to rename branch and jump table labels
  after their containing function (#142).
  - Thanks @cadmic

### Changed

- Emit which symbol produced the generation of an automatically generated and
  unused pad.
- Change how the variables csv file is parsed: If the size column is either
  empty, a dash (`-`) or zero then that column is ignored.
- Autogenerated symbol names are now padded up to 8 hex digits, contrary to the
  old 6 hex digits.
  - Since this may be a breaking change for some people the old functionallity
    can be restored by enabling the `GlobalConfig.LEGACY_SYM_ADDR_ZERO_PADDING`
    setting, or by passing `--legacy-sym-addr-zero-padding` when invoking a
    command line front-end.

### Deprecated

- `GlobalConfig.LEGACY_SYM_ADDR_ZERO_PADDING` (and the CLI version
  `--legacy-sym-addr-zero-padding`) are deprecated.
  - There's no replacement for this option.

### Fixed

- Avoid using the wrong immediate for gp-relative references if the address
  could not be symbolized.
  - In example, if said address is outside of the known address range.
- Fix some niche cases where spimdisasm may emit duplicated data symbol labels
  but without their data.

## [1.18.0] - 2023-10-29

### Added

- Add option to rename the sections generated by `FunctionRodataEntry`
  - `FunctionRodataEntry.sectionText` to rename the `.text` section
  - `FunctionRodataEntry.sectionRodata` to rename the `.rodata` section
  - `FunctionRodataEntry.sectionLateRodata` to rename the `.late_rodata` section

## [1.17.4] - 2023-10-07

### Added

- Add `CHANGELOG.md`

### Fixed

- Fix not decoding some valid Japense strings on `decodeBytesToStrings`
  - Specifically SHIFT-JIS ones with raw characters `0x8C` and `0x8D`

## [1.17.3] - 2023-09-18

### Changed

- Hardcodes a check to avoid disassembling `.vutext`. This will be changed in a
  future release.
  - Fixes `.vutext` sections from PS2 elfs messing with symbol analyzis

### Fixed

- Fix `.double` disassembly for little endian

## [1.17.2] - 2023-09-18

### Uncategorized

- Dummy update, sorry

## [1.17.1] - 2023-09-15

### Added

- Option to set the filtering addresses for the symbol finder

### Changed

- Tweak endlabel to be emitted in the same place as the size directive does
- Emit global labels for symbols with no type in the middle of functions
- Consider the `j` instruction as a function end if rabbitizer's `--j-branch`
  option is turned off
- Always migrate mips1 doubles when migrating rodata

### Fixed

- Add checks for `$rs` and `$rt` registers instead of assuming they are used to
  avoid crashing during runtime.

## [1.17.0] - 2023-08-27

### Changed

- Allow using `MIPS_NONE` reloc type as a way to avoid symbolizing a reference
  and use the raw value instead.
- Allow using a different label for symbols in the middle of functions.
  - Useful for setting alternative entry points for handwritten functions.
  - It can be used by setting the `ASM_TEXT_ALT_LABEL`.

### Fixed

- Fix `elfObjDisasm` crashing if a reloc section references an unhandled section
  like `.pdr`.

## [1.16.5] - 2023-08-22

### Changed

- Do not use iQue symbols by default if user asked only for libultra symbols

## [1.16.4] - 2023-08-19

### Added

- Try to gather the `$gp` register value from non-PIP elfs too
- Detect ABI and cpu flags from elf header.

### Changed

- Do not use mips1 double detection heuristic on non o32 abis

### Fixed

- Various bugfixes related to `j` instructions being used as a way to call
  another function.
- Fix size directive not being properly emitted for functions with user-declared
  size that has dangling nops.
- Avoid warning about `LOCAL` `NOTYPE` symbols in elf files

## [1.16.3] - 2023-08-15

### Fixed

- Fix hex comment crashing because of doubles when parsing little endian binaries

## [1.16.2] - 2023-08-14

### Added

- Generate pad symbols to honor user declared sizes
  - Symbols will be automatically splitted if the user-declared size is smaller
  than the symbol size (usually due to size not being a multiple of 4, file
  splits, other symbols not being referenced, etc)
- Add the character `0x1A` to set of special cases for string decoding.

### Changed

- Workaround for big addends when building with modern GAS

### Fixed

- Fix size directive not using the right label when symbols are smaller than a word
- Fix size directive not being properly emitted for symbols with a size smaller
  than a word
- Fix bug which produced reporting incorrect file splits on strings which their
  last word was a zero.

## [1.16.0] - 2023-07-23

### Added

- Add a detector for the redundant function end produced by IDO with some
  specific flag combinations.
  - It is turned off by default, but it can be turned on globally with
    `--detect-redundant-function-end`, or globally and per file via the API.

### Fixed

- Fix BSS sections not emitting a first symbol if it isn't referenced anywhere.

## [1.15.4] - 2023-07-14

### Changed

- Avoid taking into account invalid instructions when trying to find function boundaries.

### Fixed

- Properly honor size of user-declared symbols for elf static symbols.

## [1.15.3] - 2023-07-10

### Changed

- Don't append the section name if it is known when disassembling elfs
  - This special cases the sections `.text`, `.data`, `.rodata` and `.bss`.
  - Avoids the redundant `filename_.text/` naming scheme

## [1.15.2] - 2023-07-04

### Fixed

- Fix hardcoded shift value in alignment directive

## [1.15.1] - 2023-07-04

### Changed

- Emit string alignment directives even when the section isn't aligned to a
  multiple of 8.
  - Some projects can have rodata sections aligned to just a multiple of 4, and
    not emitting the directive in those cases can break their builds

## [1.15.0] - 2023-07-03

### Added

- Implement string guesser for the data section.
  - Controlled by the API `GlobalConfig.DATA_STRING_GUESSER_LEVEL` or via the
    CLI `--data-string-guesser level`.
  - Decodes strings with the `ASCII` encoding by default.
  - The meaning of each level are the same as the rodata string guesser.
  - The level defaults to 2.
- Add experimental Pascal string guesser.
  - Works for both rodata and data sections.
  - Follows the same level logic as the C string guesser.
  - It is disabled by default.

### Changed

- Change the string guesser to work with multiple levels instead of plainly
  enabled/disabled and the aggressive toggle.
  - The new option is used via the API
    `GlobalConfig.RODATA_STRING_GUESSER_LEVEL` or via the CLI
    `--rodata-string-guesser level`.
  - Meaning of the new levels:
    - level 0: Completely disable the guessing feature.
    - level 1: The most conservative guessing level. Imposes the following restrictions:
      - Do not try to guess if the user provided a type for the symbol.
      - Do no try to guess if type information for the symbol can be inferred by
        other means.
      - A string symbol must be referenced only once.
      - Strings must not be empty.
    - level 2: A string no longer needs to be referenced only once to be
      considered a possible string. This can happen because of a deduplication optimization.
    - level 3: Empty strings are allowed.
    - level 4: Symbols with autodetected type information but no user type
      information can still be guessed as strings.
  - The level defaults to 1.
- Start emitting `.size` directives by default.
- Emit `jlabel` instead of `dlabel` for jumptable labels by default
- Emit `dlabel` instead of `dlabel` for data, rodata and bss symbols by default

### Deprecated

- The old `GlobalConfig.STRING_GUESSER` and
  `GlobalConfig.AGGRESSIVE_STRING_GUESSER` options are now deprecated, same as
  the CLI options `--string-guesser` and `--aggressive-string-guesser`.
  - The old `GlobalConfig.STRING_GUESSER = True` is equivalent to the new
    `GlobalConfig.RODATA_STRING_GUESSER_LEVEL = 1`
  - The old `GlobalConfig.AGGRESSIVE_STRING_GUESSER = True` is equivalent to
    the new `GlobalConfig.RODATA_STRING_GUESSER_LEVEL = 4`

## [1.14.3] - 2023-06-19

### Added

- Failcheck for non aligned doubles

### Changed

- `elfObjDisasm`: Can now disassemble sections with arbitrary names
- `disasmdis`: Disable pseudo instructions by default

### Fixed

- (Hopefully) Fix same-vram overlays using symbols from other overlays

## [1.14.2] - 2023-06-10

### Changed

- Actually add `py.typed` to `pyproject.toml`
- Use `bytearray` as little as possible

### Deprecated

- `writeBytearrayToFile` is now deprecated, use `writeBytesToFile` instead

## [1.14.1] - 2023-06-10

### Added

- Emit a previous alignment directive for strings.
  - Ensures strings are always word aligned
- Add `py.typed` file. Whoops

### Changed

- Purge `.balign` directive in favor of `.align` directive

## [1.14.0] - 2023-05-10

### Added

- Implement `--dyn-syms` on readelf-like mode.

### Changed

- Improve a bit support for N32 PIC programs.
  - The current issue was spimdisasm was not able to properly generate symbol
    references for `$gp` accesses.
  - GOT table now gets its own address from the reginfo instead of the dynamic table.
  - Accesses pointing outside the GOT table are tried to be redirected to
    `sdata`, `srdata` and `sbss` sections.
- Minor improvements to readelf output format

## [1.13.3] - 2023-05-05

### Fixed

- Fix not writing to subfolders properly when a csv filesplit entry has a slash
  on its name.

## [1.13.2] - 2023-05-01

### Added

- Add support for `.dummy` section in csv file split format
- Add readelf's `--section-headers` flag to elfObjDisasm

## [1.13.1] - 2023-04-30

### Added

- Add note about R3000GTE and R5900 instruction set support in the README

### Fixed

- Fix a possible `None` case in `getInstrCategoryFromStr`

## [1.13.0] - 2023-04-30

### Added

- Add support for R3000GTE

## [1.12.5] - 2023-04-28

### Added

- Add `--function-info` flag to `elfObjDisasm`
- Option for emitting `.size`` directives in the generated assembly
  - Add `--asm-emit-size-directive` flag to emit size directives on generated assembly

### Fixed

- Fix jumptable end detection algorithm on vram ranges different than `0x80XXXXXX`

## [1.12.4] - 2023-04-19

### Fixed

- Fix user-declared relocs having an incorrect addend

## [1.12.3] - 2023-04-18

### Fixed

- Fix conflicting `-V` flag

## [1.12.2] - 2023-04-18

### Added

- Add `--version` flag to every cli tool
- Properly detect `-mips1` `double` literals
  - Fixes issue #57

### Changed

- Emit a comment saying if a reloc is a global one when the emit relocs flag is passed

### Fixed

- Fix data symbols not using local reloc overrides
- Fix `.word`s not being updated after clearing pointers
- Some pointer clearing fixes
- Fix data not being properly disassembled on `singleFileDisasm`
- Enforce UTF-8 encoding on generated asm files (PR #111)
  - Thanks to @1superchip
- Fix incorrect addends on non static symbols from elf files.
  - Fixes issue #110
- Fix a regression where some `%lo` symbols weren't being properly paired
  because of the `%got` being reused on PIC code
- Fix sizes for inferred types

## [1.12.1] - 2023-03-28

### Fixed

- Fix addends bigger than `0x7FFF` and smaller than `0x10000`

## [1.12.0] - 2023-03-21

### Added

- Expose known types to spimdisasm via `common.gKnownTypes`

### Changed

- Improve handling `static` (local) symbols for non relocated elf object files
- Fake/non used symbols are not longer emitted when disassembling elf `.o` files

### Fixed

- Prevents referencing labels and jumptable labels with addends
- Prevents referencing labels and jumptable labels in non jumptable symbols

## [1.11.6] - 2023-03-10

### Added

- Add flag to specify instruction category in `elfObjDisasm` and `singleFileDisasm`
- Add `ContextSymbol.userDeclaredType` and `ContextSymbol.autodetectedType`

### Deprecated

- Deprecate `ContextSymbol.type`
  - `.type` is kept as a property to provide backwards compatibility

## [1.11.5] - 2023-03-07

### Changed

- Sort detected file boundaries and remove duplicates

## [1.11.4] - 2023-02-20

### Changed

- Add function vrom to `--function-info` and tweak its input a bit

### Fixed

- Fix `--data-start` not processing hex correctly

## [1.11.3] - 2023-02-15

### Added

- Allow specifying a custom suffix to every autogenerated symbol with `--custom-suffix`
- Add "referenced functions" information to the `--function-info` flag

## [1.11.2] - 2023-02-13

### Added

- Add flag to emit inline relocs
- Add `ContextSymbol.userDeclaredSize`
- Add `--function-info` flag

### Changed

- Do not report extra padding in functions if user declared size matches the
  size of the function
- `FuncRodataEntry`: Fix migrate parameter if function has no rodata to be migrated

### Deprecated

- Deprecate `ContextSymbol.size`
  - It is kept as a property that wraps `ContextSymbol.userDeclaredSize`

## [1.11.1] - 2023-01-30

### Changed

- Allow `None` in `FunctionRodataEntry` methods
- `FuncRodataEntry`: Do not write `.section .text` if the function is `None`

## [1.11.0] - 2023-01-30

### Added

- Install CLI tools as actual terminal programs
- Allow invoking the CLI tools from spimdisasm as subparsers
- Report, with a comment, which instruction made spimdisasm detect a function as
  handwritten function
- New in the API: `FunctionRodataEntry`
  - Cleaner interface for rodata migration and similar functions
  - Provides method for intermixing functions and non-migrated rodata symbols in
    a way the correct order is still preserved

### Deprecated

- The old way of invoking the CLI tools (`python3 -m spimdisasm.clitool`) is now
  deprecated, but still works
- Old functions from `FileHandlers` which provided rodata migration
  functionalities are now deprecated in favour of the new `FunctionRodataEntry`.

### Fixed

- `disasmdis`: Fix crash if the input isn't a multiple of a word

## [1.10.6] - 2023-01-28

### Added

- Add hardware registers as constants so they are used by `lui`/`ori` pairs
- Check for bss symbol size to match user declared size
  - If the size doesn't match then a warning is printed to `stderr`
- Warn if the globalsegment's vrom start and end is the same
- Identify 32bitsmode elf flag

### Changed

- Avoid reporting leading zeroes as padding in rodata symbols if the size of the
  symbol matches the user declared one

### Fixed

- Fix some `.text` boundaries not being properly detected.

## [1.10.5] - 2023-01-28

### Added

- Emit a comment on invalid instructions disassembled as words

### Removed

- Remove redundant `.noreorder`

### Fixed

- Fix `disasmdis` ignoring endian parameter

## [1.10.4] - 2023-01-20

### Added

- Add `EGCS` compiler
- Add iQue-specific libultra syms and hardware regs
- Add `--data-start` and `--data-end` flags to `singleFileDisasm`

### Changed

- `nop`s at the beginning of the files are now skipped.

### Fixed

- Avoid trashing function analysis for `j` jumps outside of the function
- Fix `disasmdis` not properly accepting spaces

## [1.10.3] - 2023-01-08

### Fixed

- Fix OoB for automatic type-based naming

## [1.10.2] - 2023-01-08

### Fixed

- Fix a small typo on `osAppNMIBuffer`

## [1.10.1] - 2023-01-05

### Added

- Add a workaround for addends which does not fit on a 16 bits value

## [1.10.0] - 2023-01-05

### Added

- Add support for splat's symbol_addrs format for standalone invocations

### Changed

- Rework system to allow/disallow addend references on data

## [1.9.2] - 2023-01-02

### Added

- Add `nameEnd` member to `ContextSymbol` to allow emitting a closing
  user-declared label

### Fixed

- Fix emitting `.align` directives on unnaligned jumptables
- Fix rodata split detection not properly considering special jumptable alignment

## [1.9.1] - 2022-12-29

### Changed

- Emit a `.align 3` directive for every jumptable on non-IDO compilers

## [1.9.0] - 2022-12-28

### Added

- `GlobalConfig` variables can now be set via environment variables.
  - Parameters passed by cli take priority over environment variables.
  - Options configured via code (when using this as a library) take priority
    over environment variables.

### Changed

- Reloc system re-worked. Users can now provide their own relocs to improve the
  automatic disassembly

### Removed

- loPatch system has been removed and superseded by the global reloc system

## [1.8.2] - 2022-12-19

### Added

- Check for banned symbols on addends references

## [1.8.1] - 2022-12-19

### Added

- New interface for allowing banning ranges of symbols, instead of having to add
  them one by one

## [1.8.0] - 2022-12-16

### Added

- Allow to type-hint strings with `asciz`
- Allow disassembling `.data` symbols as strings
  - This won't be automatically guessed as with `.rodata`, this only will happen
    with type-hints

### Changed

- Require [`rabbitizer` 1.4.0](https://github.com/Decompollaborate/rabbitizer/releases/tag/1.4.0)
- `disasmdis` now accepts spaces and input from `stdin`

### Removed

- `setup.cfg` was removed and all its info was moved to `pyproject.toml`

## [1.7.12] - 2022-12-05

### Added

- Output version on disassembled files
- Add option to show which symbols reference the disassembled symbol
- Add `--file-splits` option to `elfObjDisasm`

### Changed

- Allow symbol references on rodata (for non jump-tables)

## [1.7.11] - 2022-11-29

### Changed

- Check size of floats and doubles before migrating them

## [1.7.10] - 2022-11-26

### Added

- Allow changing the label used for jumptables labels with `GlobalConfig.ASM_JTBL_LABEL`
- Allow forcing (and forcing not to) migrate a symbol on rodata migration
- Show `isAutogeneratedPad` in the context file (#79)
  - Thanks @simonlindholm
- Show the first `%lo` reference for each symbol in the context (#80)
  - Thanks @simonlindholm

### Fixed

- Reference `NOTYPE` symbols
- Various GOT fixes

## [1.7.9] - 2022-11-09

### Added

- Emit a comment for automatically generated bss pads.
  - Those pads are created mainly to properly adjust the `.space` of a bss
    symbol if said symbol had an user-declared size

### Fixed

- Fix an OoB issue when trying to post-process the GOT analyzis on non-PIC mode

## [1.7.8] - 2022-11-04

### Changed

- Improve logic to disassemble `.byte`s and `.short`s
- Improve logic to find the jumptable ends (again)

### Fixed

- Fix function pointers being incorrectly tagged as `%call16` instead of `%got`
- Avoid crashing when trying to migrate functions when there's no rodata section
- Fix wrong migrated rodata on PIC programs
- Avoid using addends on function references

## [1.7.7] - 2022-11-02

### Added

- Allow disassembling data symbols as floats and doubles

### Changed

- Improve detection of the end of jumptables
- Refactor REL handling. It has been simplified
  - This should improve disassembling `.o` files
- Symbols from elfs are checked to be in the correct vram range before adding
  them to the context.

## [1.7.6] - 2022-10-31

### Added

- Add special handling for the GOT lazy resolver

### Changed

- Refactor GOT handling
  - Should fix IDO 5.3 disassembly
- Use `glabel`s for jumptable labels when the functions are not being migrated
- Support `MIPS_GOT_HI16`, `MIPS_GOT_LO16`, `MIPS_CALL_HI16` and
  `MIPS_CALL_LO16` reloc types from `.rel` elf sections
- `disasmdis` now ignores non hex characters
- Negative addresses are considered as GOT accesses in PIC mode

## [1.7.5] - 2022-10-30

### Changed

- Use `.gpword` on PIC jumptables
- Use `glabel` on migrated rodata again until we figure out why it messes matching
- Do not use `glabel` on jumptable labels

### Fixed

- Fix showing the got table in a few niche cases

## [1.7.4] - 2022-10-28

1.7.4: GOT fixes

### Added

- The autodetected size of functions can now be queried from a `ContextSymbol`
  with `getSize()`
- The arch level can now be specified when disassembling
  - It is detected automatically when parsing an elf file
  - `.set gp=64` is disabled on MIPS1 and MIPS2 arch levels
- `elfObjDisasm` will now produce a list of functions and non migrated rodata
  when requesting to migrate functions.
  - This can be useful to bootstrap newly generated C files so the rodata order
    is easier to preserve

### Changed

- `elfObjDisasm` now display progress to stdout when disassembling
  - This behavior can be disabled with `-q`
- Rodata migration has been slightly tweaked: migration will be performed if
  only one function references the symbol, contrary to the old "only one
  reference in the whole codebase must reference the symbol"
  - Seems to be a common pattern on PIC programs compiled with IDO

### Fixed

- Fix using GOT local addresses as functions
- Fix `.data` symbols incorrectly referencing GOT local addresses
- Fix `elfObjDisasm` using N64 specific symbols by default
- Migrated rodata will no longer use glabels
  - This change was made to accommodate GOT global/local references

## [1.7.3] - 2022-10-24

1.7.3: `--aggressive-string-guesser`

### Added

- New `--aggressive-string-guesser` flag
  - Tries to decode string even if the string is empty, the symbol may have type
    information or it is referenced more than once
- Add `PSYQ` compiler option
  - Currently it enables the same options as `SN64`

### Changed

- Do not try to infer the type of a variable if the access types are heterogeneous,
  which may imply a struct

## [1.7.2] - 2022-10-24

### Added

- Allow passing context flags to `elfObjDisasm`

### Fixed

- Fix type inference if the user declared a type for the variable
- Fix some strings not being properly detected on elf files (again)

## [1.7.1] - 2022-10-23

1.7.1: elf fixing: got and dynamic programs

### Added

- `elfObjDisasm`: Flags which try to mimic `readelf`: `--file-header`, `--syms`,
  `--relocs` and `-display-got`
- `elfObjDisasm`: Add `--split-functions`. It has the same behavior as `singleFileDisasm`
- `elfObjDisasm`: Warn when trying to disassemble an `abi2` (N32) elf
- `elfObjDisasm`: Warn for negative GOT accesses instead of crashing
- `elfObjDisasm`: Warn if unhandled flags are found in an elf file

### Fixed

- `elfObjDisasm`. Fix undefined symbols handling in
- `elfObjDisasm`. Fix addends of got global symbols
- `elfObjDisasm`. Use rel types types from the elf file if they are available
  instead of trying to infer them
- `elfObjDisasm`: Fix gp value detection on N32 abi
- `elfObjDisasm`: `$gp` access are no longer symbolized if the address is not
  found in the got table
- Fix rodata pointer detection in data on elf files (fixes #63)

## [1.7.0] - 2022-10-18

### Added

- Add `leoBootID` to libultra syms
- `--no-emit-cpload` flag to disable emitting the `.cpload` directive in PIC programs
  - `_gp_disp` is emitted instead of the raw immediate values
  - The `_gp_disp` value is emitted as a comment

### Changed

- Updates `rabbitizer` requirement to 1.3.1
- Tweak string disassembly
  - If a symbol is in the middle of a string then the string is aborted and
    disassembled as `.word`s
  - Check the next bytes (until a word boundary) after the nul terminator of a
    string are zero. Thanks @Xeeynamo (#64)
  - Strings with '\a' are no longer treated as real strings
- Avoid pairing `%gp_got` symbols on non PIC code
- General cleanups

### Removed

- Remove `GlobalConfig.ADD_NEW_SYMBOLS`

### Fixed

- Fix `--help` screen. whoops
- Fix `.byte` and `.short` in little endian (#62)
  - Thanks @Xeeynamo
- Fix boundaries detection reporting in `elfObjDisasm` (#65)
  - The output of this report is csv-friendly.
  - Thanks @EllipticEllipsis
- Fix labels not being emitted in rodata if they were not being word-aligned.
  - Fixes #59

## [1.6.5] - 2022-10-07

1.6.5: elf fixes

### Fixed

- Avoid crashing if a `%got` access' address is not in the global table. Prints
  a warning instead.
- Fix symbol usage on relocatable files, kinda
- Ignore `.rel` sections if the file is not of REL type
- Avoid emitting `%got` rels for non PIC disassemblies

## [1.6.4] - 2022-10-06

1.6.4: Fix symtab parsing from relocated elfs

### Fixed

- Fix symtab parsing from relocated elfs

## [1.6.3] - 2022-10-04

1.6.3: Speedup for overlay disassembly

### Changed

- Moves the `globalSegment` check above all the other checks in `getSymbol`,
  providing a faster lookup since most of the time overlays usually reference a
  symbol from the `globalSegment` over a symbol from another overlay segment
  from a different category

## [1.6.2] - 2022-10-03

1.6.2: hotfix

### Fixed

- Fix unhashable type crash
  - Fixes #55

## [1.6.1] - 2022-10-03 [YANKED]

1.6.1: SN64 strikes again

### Added

- Add align directive for doubles for SN64
- Track which functions references each symbol
  - Used to improve rodata migration on non-IDO compilers

### Changed

- Use `g` format specifier when formatting disassembled floats and doubles

## [1.6.0] - 2022-10-01

1.6.0: Refactor front-end scripts

### Changed

- The frontend scripts were converted to submodules, now those can be executed
  with the `python3 -m spimdisasm.submodulename` syntax, allowing to execute
  them even in the pip installations of spimdisasm.
- Refactored raw path handling to use `pathlib`.
- Add installation instructions to readme.
- SN64 tweaks:
  - Use `.align` directive for string disassembly on SN64
  - Migrate const variables to functions on SN64
  - Remove `.rdata` check on migrated rodata for SN64

### Removed

- Deleted `singleFileDisasm.py`, `simpleFileDisasm.py`, `disasmdis.py`,
  `rspDisasm.py`, `elfObjDisasm.py`

## [1.5.7] - 2022-09-30

1.5.7: Fix 0 size bss variables

### Fixed

- Fixes an issue where 0 size bss variables where being outputted if the last
  bss variable of a file had a size which filled its size up until the file boundary

## [1.5.6] - 2022-09-27

1.5.6: More SN64 tweaks and data/rodata endianess

### Added

- Add option to disassemble data/rodata with different endianess than the global
  one
- Allow changing the string encoding per rodata segment

### Changed

- Use `.rdata` on rodata migration for SN64

### Fixed

- Fixes data analyzis.
  - It was ignoring banned symbols
- Fix `ASM_DATA_SYM_AS_LABEL` on bss generation
- Fix rodata symbols searching during migration
- Return the created segment by `addOverlaySegment`

## [1.5.5] - 2022-09-24

1.5.5: Fix `ASM_DATA_SYM_AS_LABEL`

### Fixed

- Fix `ASM_DATA_SYM_AS_LABEL`: It was outputing the data label

## [1.5.4] - 2022-09-24

1.5.4: More SN64 tweaks

### Added

- `ASM_DATA_SYM_AS_LABEL`: Allow adding a data symbol as a simple label.
- Allow range checks on symbols referenced by data symbols
- Add option to allow all addends referenced by data symbols

### Changed

- `late_rodata` logic has been tweaked to only be applied when compiler is set
  to IDO

### Fixed

- Fix use of user-declared sizes on functions and bss symbols

## [1.5.3] - 2022-09-23

1.5.3: More default banned symbols

### Changed

- Add `0x7FFFFFFF` to the list of default banned symbols

## [1.5.2] - 2022-09-21

1.5.2: elf endianess fixes and rodata migration fixes

### Changed

- Read endianess from elf file
- Use `.section` directive on migrated rodata

## [1.5.1] - 2022-09-19

1.5.1: symbol detection fixes

### Changed

- Check for data pointers in data itself and do a recheck in case the pointer is
  in the same section but behind the current symbol
- Properly update original symbol type when creating symbols for sub-4 sizes

## [1.5.0] - 2022-09-17

1.5.0: dynamic elfs

### Added

- Add compatibility for dynamic elf files
  - `.dynsym`, `.dynstr` and `.dynamic` section parsing
  - `.got` table parsing
  - Use `%got` and `%call16` syntax for `$gp` relative symbols.
  - `.cpload REG` detection

### Changed

- Minor changes on string splitting functions to improve its use as an api

## [1.4.2] - 2022-09-09

1.4.2: PS2 addresses hotfix

### Fixed

- Fix 0 and negative addresses being treated as real symbols

## [1.4.1] - 2022-09-03

1.4.1: Overlay function start bugfix

### Fixed

- Fixes a bug in which a function start was wrongly detected on an overlay because
  the symbol existed for said address on the global segment

## [1.4.0] - 2022-08-27

1.4.0: RSP and R5900 support

### Added

- Adds proper support for N64's RSP
- Allows passing any `rabbitizer.InstrCategory` to SectionText to allow using
  any instruction set supported by `rabbitizer`

## [1.3.0] - 2022-07-08

1.3.0: rabbitizer 1.0.0

### Added

- Rodata boundaries detection

### Changed

- Updated to use rabbitizer 1.0.0

## [1.2.4] - 2022-07-05

### Changed

- Explicitly require a `rabbitizer` version smaller than the next major version to
  avoid possible compatibility issues.
- Set up automatic discovery on `setup.cfg`

## [1.2.3] - 2022-06-11

1.2.3: Fix Python 3.7 compatibility (again)

### Fixed

- This time really fixes 3.7 compat, hopefully

## [1.2.2] - 2022-06-11

1.2.2: %hi/%lo symbol filtering fix

### Fixed

- Prevents filtering out `lui`/`addiu` combos from being real symbols

## [1.2.1] - 2022-06-10

1.2.1: Packaging fix

### Fixed

- Hopefully fixes a packaging problem on PyPi

## [1.2.0] - 2022-06-10 [YANKED]

1.2.0: Faster disassembly from rabbitizer

### Changed

- Use [rabbitizer](https://pypi.org/project/rabbitizer/) as the instruction
  decoder to speed up instruction analysis and disassembly
- Other minor changes to try to be compatible with Python 3.7

## [1.1.7] - 2022-06-08

### Changed

- Allow changing the file offset width comment
- `SortedDict`: New class which abstracts away the logic for keeping a sorted dictionary

## [1.1.6] - 2022-06-03

1.1.6: %hi reuse fix

### Fixed

- Fix `%hi` reuse with wrong values

## [1.1.5] - 2022-06-03

1.1.5: More overlay fixes

### Changed

- Move most of the instruction analyzing code to a new independent class
- Try to track instructions which are likely to not be a `%lo` and avoid pairing
  it.
- Extra checks to avoid using labels from other overlay segments
- Only stop a look ahead search until we find either an unconditional branch or
  a `jr` instruction

## [1.1.4] - 2022-06-02

1.1.4: Overlay handling fixes

### Changed

- Overall adds more vrom checks for handling shared-vram overlays.
- The autogenerated symbol size now adjusts itself considering the symbol type
  and the address alignment

## [1.1.3] - 2022-06-01

1.1.3: Minor patch

### Added

- Adds a way to register a name getter callback for symbols

## [1.1.2] - 2022-06-01

1.1.2: More symbol finding cleanups

### Added

- New `COMPILER` option in `GlobalConfig`, used to enable some compiler
  specific tweaks

### Fixed

- General cleanups and fixes related to symbol finding.

## [1.1.1] - 2022-05-30

1.1.1: Symbol finding fixes

### Fixed

- Multiples workarounds for pairing multiples %hi to the same %lo
- Fix `j` target calculation for the look ahead symbol finder
- Special cases for `lui`s on delay slots
- Track moving registers by using `move`, `or` and `addu`
- Invalidate some registers after function calls
- Check negative branches
- Fix jump table detector for SN64

## [1.1.0] - 2022-05-29

1.1.0: Overlay support (hopefully)

### Added

- Add support for overlays which share VRAMs and overlays which may communicate
  to overlays from other categories.
  - Each new category and overlay segment must be registered in `Context`
- The `vrom` of elements is tracked and stored. It is mainly used to
  autogenerate overlay's names.
- The categorization in symbol categories (labels, functions, symbols, etc) is
  removed. Everything now is stored in only one big dictionary to avoid
  duplication and lower memory usage.

### Changed

- `ElementBase#vram` is now just an `int` as opposed to old `int|None`.
- `addSymbol`, `getSymbol` and similar methods were moved to `ElementBase`
  because of the need for the respective element overlay info.
- Symbol name generation is delayed as much as possible and autogenerated on
  the fly.
- General cleanups

### Removed

- Remove the concept of "fake functions"

### Fixed

- Some minor symbol finder fixes
- Gix symbols disappearing for no reason

## [1.0.6] - 2022-05-26

1.0.6: Even more SN64 fixes

### Added

- Add more checks for `j` as unconditional branch
- Allow disabling `%hi`/`%lo` syntax for constants
- Add extra global label for other symbols (usually labels) in functions when
  `GlobalConfig.ASM_TEXT_FUNC_AS_LABEL` is enabled.

## [1.0.5] - 2022-05-26

### Added

- Allow setting a `.ent` and the function name as a label
- Float register `$31` fix for `NAMED_REGISTERS=False`

### Changed

- Only apply the SN64 DIV fix for non handwritten functions
- Finer control over pseudo instructions

### Fixed

- Fix CI builds (2)

## [1.0.4] - 2022-05-26 [YANKED]

### Fixed

- Fix the CI wheel

## [1.0.3] - 2022-05-26 [YANKED]

### Changed

- Add CI which builds a wheel and publishes it to PyPI

## [1.0.2] - 2022-05-26

### Added

- Allow changing the line ends to anything via `GlobalConfig.LINE_ENDS`

### Fixed

- Fix missing `f` on float registers when `GlobalConfig.NAMED_REGISTERS` was set
  to `False`

## [1.0.1] - 2022-05-26

### Changed

- Improve RAM usage by removing an almost unused dictionary from the Instruction
  classes

## [1.0.0] - 2022-05-26

### Added

- Version 1.0.0

[unreleased]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/master...develop
[1.19.0]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.18.0...1.19.0
[1.18.0]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.17.4...1.18.0
[1.17.4]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.17.3...1.17.4
[1.17.3]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.17.2...1.17.3
[1.17.2]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.17.1...1.17.2
[1.17.1]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.17.0...1.17.1
[1.17.0]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.16.5...1.17.0
[1.16.5]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.16.4...1.16.5
[1.16.4]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.16.3...1.16.4
[1.16.3]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.16.2...1.16.3
[1.16.2]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.16.0...1.16.2
[1.16.0]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.15.4...1.16.0
[1.15.4]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.15.3...1.15.4
[1.15.3]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.15.2...1.15.3
[1.15.2]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.15.1...1.15.2
[1.15.1]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.15.0...1.15.1
[1.15.0]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.14.3...1.15.0
[1.14.3]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.14.2...1.14.3
[1.14.2]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.14.1...1.14.2
[1.14.1]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.14.0...1.14.1
[1.14.0]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.13.3...1.14.0
[1.13.3]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.13.2...1.13.3
[1.13.2]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.13.1...1.13.2
[1.13.1]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.13.0...1.13.1
[1.13.0]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.12.5...1.13.0
[1.12.5]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.12.4...1.12.5
[1.12.4]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.12.3...1.12.4
[1.12.3]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.12.2...1.12.3
[1.12.2]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.12.1...1.12.2
[1.12.1]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.12.0...1.12.1
[1.12.0]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.11.6...1.12.0
[1.11.6]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.11.5...1.11.6
[1.11.5]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.11.4...1.11.5
[1.11.4]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.11.3...1.11.4
[1.11.3]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.11.2...1.11.3
[1.11.2]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.11.1...1.11.2
[1.11.1]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.11.0...1.11.1
[1.11.0]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.10.6...1.11.0
[1.10.6]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.10.5...1.10.6
[1.10.5]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.10.4...1.10.5
[1.10.4]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.10.3...1.10.4
[1.10.3]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.10.2...1.10.3
[1.10.2]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.10.1...1.10.2
[1.10.1]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.10.0...1.10.1
[1.10.0]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.9.2...1.10.0
[1.9.2]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.9.1...1.9.2
[1.9.1]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.9.0...1.9.1
[1.9.0]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.8.2...1.9.0
[1.8.2]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.8.1...1.8.2
[1.8.1]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.8.0...1.8.1
[1.8.0]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.7.12...1.8.0
[1.7.12]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.7.11...1.7.12
[1.7.11]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.7.10...1.7.11
[1.7.10]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.7.9...1.7.10
[1.7.9]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.7.8...1.7.9
[1.7.8]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.7.7...1.7.8
[1.7.7]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.7.6...1.7.7
[1.7.6]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.7.5...1.7.6
[1.7.5]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.7.4...1.7.5
[1.7.4]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.7.3...1.7.4
[1.7.3]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.7.2...1.7.3
[1.7.2]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.7.1...1.7.2
[1.7.1]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.7.0...1.7.1
[1.7.0]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.6.5...1.7.0
[1.6.5]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.6.4...1.6.5
[1.6.4]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.6.3...1.6.4
[1.6.3]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.6.2...1.6.3
[1.6.2]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.6.1...1.6.2
[1.6.1]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.6.0...1.6.1
[1.6.0]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.5.7...1.6.0
[1.5.7]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.5.6...1.5.7
[1.5.6]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.5.5...1.5.6
[1.5.5]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.5.4...1.5.5
[1.5.4]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.5.3...1.5.4
[1.5.3]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.5.2...1.5.3
[1.5.2]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.5.1...1.5.2
[1.5.1]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.5.0...1.5.1
[1.5.0]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.4.2...1.5.0
[1.4.2]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.4.1...1.4.2
[1.4.1]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.4.0...1.4.1
[1.4.0]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.3.0...1.4.0
[1.3.0]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.2.4...1.3.0
[1.2.4]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.2.3...1.2.4
[1.2.3]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.2.2...1.2.3
[1.2.2]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.2.1...1.2.2
[1.2.1]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.2.0...1.2.1
[1.2.0]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.1.7...1.2.0
[1.1.7]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.1.6...1.1.7
[1.1.6]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.1.5...1.1.6
[1.1.5]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.1.4...1.1.5
[1.1.4]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.1.3...1.1.4
[1.1.3]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.1.2...1.1.3
[1.1.2]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.1.1...1.1.2
[1.1.1]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.1.0...1.1.1
[1.1.0]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.0.6...1.1.0
[1.0.6]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.0.5...1.0.6
[1.0.5]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.0.4...1.0.5
[1.0.4]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.0.3...1.0.4
[1.0.3]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.0.2...1.0.3
[1.0.2]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.0.1...1.0.2
[1.0.1]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/compare/1.0.0...1.0.1
[1.0.0]: https://github.com/Decompollaborate/spimdisasm/releases/tag/1.0.0
